It's Stephen Cruz, a Cultural Heritage Volunteer for the Ellen Lynx Project. I'm here at the Royal
Welsh Show today on the 24th of July 2023 and I'm talking to... Mike James. Mike, I overheard you
talking to Cath about where you used to live. Could you tell me a little bit more about that?
Yeah, I lived in Ryder. I grew up in Ryder from 1973. I think I was there for about 13 or 14 years.
Do you remember Ryder?
The fact, I think, that the people were very welcoming. In those days it was a smaller community than it is now.
As a family we got involved in the local organizations, the Male Voice Choir for example.
My dad was a conductor there for a while.
It was a big change for me. I was 12 or 13 when we moved there. I spent the formative years in London.
So it was quite a big shock, big change. But I still come back. Every year I come back to Ryder.
You have to. I need my fix regularly.
Where did you go to school in Ryder?
Initially I went to school at Llandrindah. After a year or so my brother and I went away to school across the border in Herefordshire.
What sort of activities did you get up to as a young boy?
Swimming in the river, fishing. I did do a bit of fishing but it was never very successful.
All sorts. Cycling, you know. I don't know.
What about the actual building that you grew up in? That's a bit special.
Yes. Mum and Dad moved up to Ryder and they bought the Ellen Hotel on West Street.
I had an aunt who was living in Ryder at the time. Her husband was a pharmacist in Ryder.
His name was Ron Davis. She was Dillis Davis.
They'd heard that the hotel was for sale. Mum and Dad were looking around at the time.
Later on in 1973 we moved up here.
It was full on hard work for them for the next 13 years running the hotel.
What other shops in Ryder do you remember?
Now they've changed a lot. Let's have a think.
There was the butchers on the corner, collards.
There was, which isn't there any longer, part of the castle now was a fresh fish shop on North Street.
Before the electrical shop was in North Street there was the Kimberley which was a cafe.
There was the shoe shop which was on West Street.
There was the outfitters. There was a big post office then also on West Street.
A lot more pubs then than there were now. I think there were 13 pubs in Ryder at the time.
That number has gone down quite a lot since then.
Do you remember any of your contemporaries from your time?
Yes, still keep in touch with some of them.
I've been up here for the last week and I've caught up with a few.
You'll walk about town now, this many years later and people still recognise me.
Which is surprising.
Well as you said at the beginning, Ryder has a real community feel to it doesn't it?
Very much so.
I just love coming up here, I love going up the Ellum Valley.
It's somewhere I have to go when I'm up here.
I've been up this last week and two or three times I've been up cycling up there and driving around.
Have you noticed many changes up there?
It's certainly not as busy as it used to be.
Yes, there are a lot more people cycling up there and that sort of thing.
Back in the 70s people used to go up there sightseeing and there used to be coach loads of tourists going around.
A lot of them used to stop at the Ellum Hotel for teas and coffees.
But I think coach holidays are not as popular now as they used to be.
But that brought a lot of business into the town.
I was going to say, I was talking to the guy who used to own the Metropole who's now died.
And he said that a year after Margaret Thatcher came in, the whole tourist trade died.
So you used to get tail backs from Crossgate into Ryder of cars going to go up the valley.
And he said, with the advent of that brand of conservatism, a lot of the heavy industries in the Midlands closed.
And people couldn't afford the holidays and they didn't come over.
And he said it was really sudden and they just bought the hotel at Devil's Bridge when the trade stopped.
Thank you, Catherine.
So is there anything else that you'd like to mention about Ryder?
Not off the top of my head, other than I'll always be back.
Good. That's wonderful. Thanks very much for your time today.